---
title: 'Random Walks III: The Optional Stopping Theorem'
date: 2024-05-22
permalink: /posts/2024/05/22/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - probability 
  - maths
---

In the last two posts, we have used the Optional Stopping Theorem to compute the expected value of a martingale at a stopping time. In this post, we will give a short proof.

To begin, let's revisit the definition of a stopping time. A stopping time \\(\tau \\) is a random variable such that set \\(\\{\tau \leq n\\}\\) is \\(\mathcal{F}\_n\\)-measurable. Intuitively, this means that \\(\tau\\) is a stopping rule where the decision to stop must be made with information available up to the present. The collection of sigma-algebras \\( \\{\mathcal{F}\_n\\}_{n=0}^{\infty}\\) is referred to as a filtration and \\(\mathcal{F}_n\\) represents the information available from time \\(0\\) to time \\(n\\). Stopping times appear often the context of betting games, where one must decide whether it is optimal to stop, or to keep playing with the possibility of a higher payout. Likewise, another example of a stopping time is the optimal early exercise point for an American option - at each point, we have enough information to evaluate whether an option's intrinsic value exceeds the expected continuation value (which only requires the current stock price, among other known quantities), and if the former is true, then we early exercise.

Now that we have an idea of stopping times, let's begin to prove the theorem, which we restate below for convenience.
> **Optional Sampling Theorem**: Let \\(\\{M_n\\}_{n=0}^{\infty}\\) be a martingale and \\(\tau\\) be a stopping time that meets any of the following the conditions:
> 1. \\(\tau\\) is bounded almost surely.
> 2. \\(E[\tau] <\infty\\) and there exists constant \\(C\\) such that for all \\(n=0,1,\ldots\\)  
>
> $$
>       E\left[\left|M_{n+1} - M_{n}\right|| \mathcal{F}_{n}\right] \leq C.
>     $$ 
> 
> 3. There exists constant \\(C\\) such that for all \\(n=0,1,\ldots\\) 
>
> $$
>   |X_{\min(\tau, n)}| \leq C.
> $$
>
> Then, 
> $$
>  E[M_\tau] = E[M_0].
> $$

We begin with the simplest case by assuming that \\(\tau\\) is bounded almost surely. There exists positive integer \\(N\\) such that \\(\tau \leq N\\) and we write

$$
    \begin{align*}
        E[M_\tau] & = \sum_{k=0}^{N} E[M_k 1_{\tau = k}] \\
        & = \sum_{k=0}^{N} E[M_k 1_{\tau \geq k}] - E[M_k 1_{\tau \geq k + 1}].
    \end{align*}
$$

Using the law of total expectation,

$$
    \begin{align*}
        E[M_k 1_{\tau \geq k}] & = E[E[M_k 1_{\tau \geq k} | \mathcal{F}_{k-1}]]\\
        & = E[1_{\tau\geq k} E[M_k | \mathcal{F}_{k-1}]] \quad \text{as }\tau\text{ is a stopping time}\\
        & = E[1_{\tau\geq k } M_{k-1}] \quad \text{as }M \text{ is a martingale}.
    \end{align*}
$$

Continuing from before,

$$
    \begin{align*}
        E[M_\tau] & = E[M_{0} 1_{\tau\geq 0}] - E[M_N 1_{\tau \geq N + 1}] + \sum_{k=1}^{N} E[M_{k-1} 1_{\tau\geq k} ] - \sum_{k=0}^{N-1} E[M_{k}1_{\tau\geq k+1}]\\
        & = E[M_0] \quad \text{as }\Pr(\tau > N) = 0.
    \end{align*}
$$

Now, suppose the conditions of case 3. are true. Define the stopping time \\(\tau_n = \min\\{\tau, n\\}\\) for positive integers \\(n\\). Since \\(\tau_n\\) is bounded by \\(n\\), we apply 1. to get

$$
    E[M_{\tau_n}] = E[M_0]
$$

As \\(M_{\tau_n}\\) is uniformly bounded and converges pointwise to \\(M_\tau\\), we have 

$$
    E[M_\tau] = \lim_{n\to\infty} E[M_{\tau_n}] = E[M_0].
$$

by the Dominated Convergence Theorem.

Finally, assume the conditions of case 2. We may write

$$
    \begin{align*}
        E[|M_{\tau_n}|] 
        & \leq E[|M_0|] + \sum_{k=0}^{n} E[|M_{k+1} - M_k|1_{\tau > k}] \\
        & = E[|M_0|] + \sum_{k=0}^{n} E\left[ E[|M_{k+1} - M_k|1_{\tau > k}| \mathcal{F}_k] \right]\\
        & \leq E[|M_0|] + C\sum_{k=0}^{n} \Pr(\tau > k) \\
        & \leq E[|M_0|] + CE[\tau] \\
        & < \infty.
    \end{align*}
$$

Again, \\(M_{\tau_n}\\) is dominated by a integrable random variable, so applying the Dominated Convergence Theorem yields the desired result.